content/post/build-code.md, before:

+++
authors = [
    "Collabora",
]
title = "Build Collabora Online"
date = "2020-10-01"
description = "Step-by-step build instructions"
tags = [
    "build",
    "make",
]
images = [
    "build-code.jpg",
]
type = "sidebar"
layout = "sidebar"
+++

Are you interested in contributing but don't know where to start? Head over documentation or start by following these step-by-step instructions and build `CODE` from scratch.

<!--more-->

Choose your operating system or opt for using Gitpod (hack, build, debug and run entirely using a web-browser) from the list below for straightforward instructions to get you going quickly. If you are a seasoned developer with commit access, or just feeling extraordinarily brave, feel free to follow the general instructions.

{{< build-dropdown >}}<br>

<section id="build-code-gitpod" class="build-code-content">

## Build CODE on Gitpod
On top of our daily LibreOffice core archives, we have also added integration support for Gitpod, a cloud based development environment. Now you can start hacking Collabora Online (COOL) in under ~5 minutes!

**Steps to quick start:**

* Sign-up on [Gitpod.io](http://gitpod.io/) with your GitHub account
* Install the [proper extension](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/browser-extension/) for your browser
* Go to [COOL repo](https://github.com/CollaboraOnline/online)
* Click on the green Gitpod button near the top of the GitHub repo page

![GitPod green button on GitHub](/images/gitpod-button-onGitHub.png)

* Wait for a few minutes, and you will have a full development environment with COOL already cloned & built, ready-to-start/develop

{{< figure src="/images/gitpod-screenshot-COOL.png" title="Gitpod, your development environment for Collabora Online on the cloud">}}

* Don’t forget to fork the main repo ![|226x56](/images/forking.gif)
* And set the remote address in .git/config to point to your fork’s address with this command:

```bash
git remote set-url origin https://github.com/PUT-YOUR-GITHUB-USERNAME-HERE/online.git
```

Happy hacking! : )

_First published on [ Collabora Online Community Roundup #2](https://www.collaboraoffice.com/online/collabora-online-community-roundup-2/)_

</section>

{{% common-build-commands section="running" %}}

---

<section id="build-code-opensuse" class="build-code-content">

## Build CODE on openSUSE
The instructions below have been prepared for and tested on openSUSE Leap 15.3. You might need to do small adjustments for other releases.

### Dependencies
We need LibreOffice core, POCO library and several other libraries and tools to build `CODE`. Open a terminal and follow the steps below.

```bash
zypper ar http://download.opensuse.org/repositories/devel:/libraries:/c_c++/openSUSE_Leap_15.3/devel:libraries:c_c++.repo
```
```bash
zypper in poco-devel libcap-progs python3-polib libcap-devel npm libtool cppunit-devel pam-devel python3-lxml
```

### LibreOffice
{{% common-build-commands section="code-needs-lo-wget" %}}

### Building CODE
You need to clone it, run autoconf/automake, configure and build using the GNU
make. **Before moving on, [fork the repo](https://github.com/CollaboraOnline/online/fork) if you haven't done that yet.**

Now clone the forked repo:
{{% common-build-commands section="clone-online" %}}

{{% common-build-commands section="build-online" %}}

{{% common-build-commands section="run-unit-tests" %}}

</section>

{{% common-build-commands section="running" %}}

---

<section id="build-code-fedora" class="build-code-content">

## Build CODE on Fedora

The instructions below have been prepared for and tested on Fedora 35. You might need to do small adjustments for Fedora-based distributions.

### Dependencies
We need LibreOffice core, POCO library and several other libraries and tools to build `CODE`.

Open a terminal and follow the steps below:

```bash
sudo dnf install poco-devel gcc gcc-c++ python3-polib \
                 libtool libstdc++-devel libpng libpng-devel \
                 cppunit-devel nodejs-devel
```

### LibreOffice
{{% common-build-commands section="code-needs-lo-wget" %}}

Now download a daily-built archive of LibreOffice core:
```bash
wget https://github.com/CollaboraOnline/online/releases/download/for-code-assets/core-co-22.05-assets.tar.gz
```

Extract the contents of the archive:
```bash
tar xvf core-co-22.05-assets.tar.gz
```

Mark the location of the extracted contents before changing directory:
```bash
export LOCOREPATH=$(pwd)
```

### Building CODE
You need to clone it, run autoconf/automake, configure and build using the GNU
make. **Before moving on, [fork the repo](https://github.com/CollaboraOnline/online/fork) if you haven't done that yet.**

Now clone the forked repo:
{{% common-build-commands section="clone-online" %}}

{{% common-build-commands section="build-online" %}}

{{% common-build-commands section="run-unit-tests" %}}

</section>

{{% common-build-commands section="running" %}}

---

<section id="build-code-arch" class="build-code-content">

## Build CODE on Arch

The instructions below have been prepared for and tested on Manjaro 21.2.3. You might need to do small adjustments for Arch and/or other Arch-based distributions.

### Dependencies
We need LibreOffice core, POCO library and several other libraries and tools to build `CODE`.

Open a terminal and follow the steps below:

```bash
sudo pacman -Syu libcap libcap-ng lib32-libcap libpng
```

```bash
sudo pacman -Syu poco cppunit nodejs npm chromium
```

```bash
sudo pacman -Syu python-pip
sudo pip install polib lxlm
```

### LibreOffice
{{% common-build-commands section="code-needs-lo-wget" %}}

Now download a daily-built archive of LibreOffice core:
```bash
wget https://github.com/CollaboraOnline/online/releases/download/for-code-assets/core-co-22.05-assets.tar.gz
```

Extract the contents of the archive:
```bash
tar xvf core-co-22.05-assets.tar.gz
```

Mark the location of the extracted contents before changing directory:
```bash
export LOCOREPATH=$(pwd)
```

### Building CODE
You need to clone it, run autoconf/automake, configure and build using the GNU
make. **Before moving on, [fork the repo](https://github.com/CollaboraOnline/online/fork) if you haven't done that yet.**

Now clone the forked repo:
{{% common-build-commands section="clone-online" %}}

{{% common-build-commands section="build-online" %}}

{{% common-build-commands section="run-unit-tests" %}}

</section>

{{% common-build-commands section="running" %}}

---

<section id="build-code-ubuntu" class="build-code-content">

## Build CODE on Ubuntu
The instructions below have been prepared for and tested on Ubuntu 20.04 LTS. You might need to do small
adjustments for other releases.

### Dependencies
We need LibreOffice core, POCO library and several other libraries and tools to build `CODE`. Open a terminal and follow the steps below.

Lets start by installing the `dialog` package, which will be needed while installaing some
of the other packages:
```bash
sudo apt install -y dialog
```

Now install the rest of the required packages:
```bash
sudo apt install -y libpoco-dev python3-polib libcap-dev npm \
                    libpam-dev wget git build-essential libtool \
                    libcap2-bin python3-lxml libpng-dev libcppunit-dev \
                    pkg-config fontconfig
```

### LibreOffice
{{% common-build-commands section="code-needs-lo-wget" %}}

Now download a daily-built archive of LibreOffice core:
```bash
wget https://github.com/CollaboraOnline/online/releases/download/for-code-assets/core-co-22.05-assets.tar.gz
```

Extract the contents of the archive:
```bash
tar xvf core-co-22.05-assets.tar.gz
```

Mark the location of the extracted contents before changing directory:
```bash
export LOCOREPATH=$(pwd)
```

### Building CODE
You need to clone it, run autoconf/automake, configure and build using the GNU
make. **Before moving on, [fork the repo](https://github.com/CollaboraOnline/online/fork) if you haven't done that yet.**

Now clone the forked repo:
{{% common-build-commands section="clone-online" %}}

{{% common-build-commands section="build-online" %}}

{{% common-build-commands section="run-unit-tests" %}}

</section>

{{% common-build-commands section="running" %}}

---

<section id="build-code-general" class="build-code-content">

## Build CODE

### Dependencies

The CODE must be built on Linux, and you need the following:

* LibreOffice
  + you need to build your own tree
* Poco library: http://pocoproject.org/
  + either use a package from your distro, or build it yourself (see below)
* libpng, libcap-progs
  + use the packages from your distro

### LibreOffice

CODE needs LibreOffice to be built to run. However, you have two options to meet this requirement: either by building it locally (Option A - recommended), or by downloading a daily built archive (Option B - quick & dirty) which contains only the absolutely necessary pieces. If you are working only on the online side, without doing any code-level changes on the LibreOffice core, or you just want to quickly get going to do some small fixes, you may prefer the second way.

#### Option A - Build LibreOffice locally (Recommended)
To build LibreOffice, follow the LibreOffice building pages:

https://wiki.documentfoundation.org/Development/BuildingOnLinux

Make sure you use and build the following specific core branch: `distro/collabora/co-22.05`

#### Option B - Download a Daily-Built Archive of LibreOffice (Quick & Dirty)
Download the daily archive:
```
wget https://github.com/CollaboraOnline/online/releases/download/for-code-assets/core-co-22.05-assets.tar.gz
```

Extract the archive:
```
tar xvf core-co-22.05-assets.tar.gz
```

You should now have two new directories extracted: `instdir` and `include`. You will use the locations of these directories for the `configure` parameters in the following steps.

### POCO

If you use openSUSE Leap 15.3, you can use:

    zypper ar http://download.opensuse.org/repositories/devel:/libraries:/c_c++/openSUSE_Leap_15.3/devel:libraries:c_c++.repo
    zypper in poco-devel libcap-progs python3-polib libcap-devel npm libtool cppunit-devel pam-devel python3-lxml

Similar repos exist for other openSUSE and SLE releases.

Collabora provides Poco packages for Debian 8, Debian 9, Ubuntu 16.04 LTS,
and CentOS 7 via the CODE (Collabora Online Development Edition) repositories,
see:

https://www.collaboraoffice.com/code/linux-packages/

Alternatively you can build your own POCO. In that case, ideally use a recent version like
1.10.1 or newer.

### Building CODE

You need to clone it, run autoconf/automake, configure and build using the GNU
make:
{{% common-build-commands section="clone-online" %}}
```bash
./autogen.sh
```
```bash
./configure --enable-silent-rules --with-lokit-path=${MASTER}/include \
            --with-lo-path=${MASTER}/instdir \
            --with-poco-includes=<POCOINST>/include --with-poco-libs=<POCOINST>/lib \
            --enable-debug --enable-cypress
```
Note: you can also add `--disable-ssl` instead of changing coolwsd.xml everytime you want to disable ssl.
```bash
make -j `nproc`
```
In the above, `${MASTER}` is the location of the LibreOffice source tree you have built
in the previous steps. `POCOINST` is the location of your custom-built or externally installed POCO library.
If you use POCO from a distro package (not a self-built version), you can omit
the `--with-poco-includes` and `--with-poco-libs` from the above.

{{% common-build-commands section="run-unit-test" %}}
</section>

{{% common-build-commands section="running" %}}

{{< edit-button to="/content/post/build-code.md" name="Edit page">}}

Commit message:

Building code in openSUSE Leap, add 15.4 tweaks and devel_basis
Signed-off-by: Pedro Pinto Silva <pedro.silva@collabora.com>

content/post/build-code.md, after:

+++
authors = [
    "Collabora",
]
title = "Build Collabora Online"
date = "2020-10-01"
description = "Step-by-step build instructions"
tags = [
    "build",
    "make",
]
images = [
    "build-code.jpg",
]
type = "sidebar"
layout = "sidebar"
+++

Are you interested in contributing but don't know where to start? Head over documentation or start by following these step-by-step instructions and build `CODE` from scratch.

<!--more-->

Choose your operating system or opt for using Gitpod (hack, build, debug and run entirely using a web-browser) from the list below for straightforward instructions to get you going quickly. If you are a seasoned developer with commit access, or just feeling extraordinarily brave, feel free to follow the general instructions.

{{< build-dropdown >}}<br>

<section id="build-code-gitpod" class="build-code-content">

## Build CODE on Gitpod
On top of our daily LibreOffice core archives, we have also added integration support for Gitpod, a cloud based development environment. Now you can start hacking Collabora Online (COOL) in under ~5 minutes!

**Steps to quick start:**

* Sign-up on [Gitpod.io](http://gitpod.io/) with your GitHub account
* Install the [proper extension](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/browser-extension/) for your browser
* Go to [COOL repo](https://github.com/CollaboraOnline/online)
* Click on the green Gitpod button near the top of the GitHub repo page

![GitPod green button on GitHub](/images/gitpod-button-onGitHub.png)

* Wait for a few minutes, and you will have a full development environment with COOL already cloned & built, ready-to-start/develop

{{< figure src="/images/gitpod-screenshot-COOL.png" title="Gitpod, your development environment for Collabora Online on the cloud">}}

* Don’t forget to fork the main repo ![|226x56](/images/forking.gif)
* And set the remote address in .git/config to point to your fork’s address with this command:

```bash
git remote set-url origin https://github.com/PUT-YOUR-GITHUB-USERNAME-HERE/online.git
```

Happy hacking! : )

_First published on [ Collabora Online Community Roundup #2](https://www.collaboraoffice.com/online/collabora-online-community-roundup-2/)_

</section>

{{% common-build-commands section="running" %}}

---

<section id="build-code-opensuse" class="build-code-content">

## Build CODE on openSUSE
The instructions below have been prepared for and tested on openSUSE Leap 15.3. You might need to do small adjustments for other releases.

### Dependencies
We need LibreOffice core, POCO library and several other libraries and tools to build `CODE`. Open a terminal and follow the steps below.

```bash
# For Leap 15.3
zypper ar http://download.opensuse.org/repositories/devel:/libraries:/c_c++/openSUSE_Leap_15.3/devel:libraries:c_c++.repo

# For Leap 15.4
zypper ar http://download.opensuse.org/repositories/devel:/libraries:/c_c++/openSUSE_Leap_15.4/devel:libraries:c_c++.repo
```
If this is fresh instalation it might be worth install devel-basis pattern: Minimal set of tools for compiling and linking applications.
It will bring in things like git, gcc, etc.
```bash
sudo zypper install -t pattern devel_basis
```
Now go ahead and install the following packages
```bash
zypper in poco-devel libcap-progs python3-polib libcap-devel npm libtool cppunit-devel pam-devel python3-lxml

# If you are using Leap 15.4 please install this aditional compatability library
zypper in libpng-16-compat-devel
```

### LibreOffice
{{% common-build-commands section="code-needs-lo-wget" %}}

### Building CODE
You need to clone it, run autoconf/automake, configure and build using the GNU
make. **Before moving on, [fork the repo](https://github.com/CollaboraOnline/online/fork) if you haven't done that yet.**

Now clone the forked repo:
{{% common-build-commands section="clone-online" %}}

{{% common-build-commands section="build-online" %}}

{{% common-build-commands section="run-unit-tests" %}}

</section>

{{% common-build-commands section="running" %}}

---

<section id="build-code-fedora" class="build-code-content">

## Build CODE on Fedora

The instructions below have been prepared for and tested on Fedora 35. You might need to do small adjustments for Fedora-based distributions.

### Dependencies
We need LibreOffice core, POCO library and several other libraries and tools to build `CODE`.

Open a terminal and follow the steps below:

```bash
sudo dnf install poco-devel gcc gcc-c++ python3-polib \
                 libtool libstdc++-devel libpng libpng-devel \
                 cppunit-devel nodejs-devel
```

### LibreOffice
{{% common-build-commands section="code-needs-lo-wget" %}}

Now download a daily-built archive of LibreOffice core:
```bash
wget https://github.com/CollaboraOnline/online/releases/download/for-code-assets/core-co-22.05-assets.tar.gz
```

Extract the contents of the archive:
```bash
tar xvf core-co-22.05-assets.tar.gz
```

Mark the location of the extracted contents before changing directory:
```bash
export LOCOREPATH=$(pwd)
```

### Building CODE
You need to clone it, run autoconf/automake, configure and build using the GNU
make. **Before moving on, [fork the repo](https://github.com/CollaboraOnline/online/fork) if you haven't done that yet.**

Now clone the forked repo:
{{% common-build-commands section="clone-online" %}}

{{% common-build-commands section="build-online" %}}

{{% common-build-commands section="run-unit-tests" %}}

</section>

{{% common-build-commands section="running" %}}

---

<section id="build-code-arch" class="build-code-content">

## Build CODE on Arch

The instructions below have been prepared for and tested on Manjaro 21.2.3. You might need to do small adjustments for Arch and/or other Arch-based distributions.

### Dependencies
We need LibreOffice core, POCO library and several other libraries and tools to build `CODE`.

Open a terminal and follow the steps below:

```bash
sudo pacman -Syu libcap libcap-ng lib32-libcap libpng
```

```bash
sudo pacman -Syu poco cppunit nodejs npm chromium
```

```bash
sudo pacman -Syu python-pip
sudo pip install polib lxlm
```

### LibreOffice
{{% common-build-commands section="code-needs-lo-wget" %}}

Now download a daily-built archive of LibreOffice core:
```bash
wget https://github.com/CollaboraOnline/online/releases/download/for-code-assets/core-co-22.05-assets.tar.gz
```

Extract the contents of the archive:
```bash
tar xvf core-co-22.05-assets.tar.gz
```

Mark the location of the extracted contents before changing directory:
```bash
export LOCOREPATH=$(pwd)
```

### Building CODE
You need to clone it, run autoconf/automake, configure and build using the GNU
make. **Before moving on, [fork the repo](https://github.com/CollaboraOnline/online/fork) if you haven't done that yet.**

Now clone the forked repo:
{{% common-build-commands section="clone-online" %}}

{{% common-build-commands section="build-online" %}}

{{% common-build-commands section="run-unit-tests" %}}

</section>

{{% common-build-commands section="running" %}}

---

<section id="build-code-ubuntu" class="build-code-content">

## Build CODE on Ubuntu
The instructions below have been prepared for and tested on Ubuntu 20.04 LTS. You might need to do small
adjustments for other releases.

### Dependencies
We need LibreOffice core, POCO library and several other libraries and tools to build `CODE`. Open a terminal and follow the steps below.

Lets start by installing the `dialog` package, which will be needed while installaing some
of the other packages:
```bash
sudo apt install -y dialog
```

Now install the rest of the required packages:
```bash
sudo apt install -y libpoco-dev python3-polib libcap-dev npm \
                    libpam-dev wget git build-essential libtool \
                    libcap2-bin python3-lxml libpng-dev libcppunit-dev \
                    pkg-config fontconfig
```

### LibreOffice
{{% common-build-commands section="code-needs-lo-wget" %}}

Now download a daily-built archive of LibreOffice core:
```bash
wget https://github.com/CollaboraOnline/online/releases/download/for-code-assets/core-co-22.05-assets.tar.gz
```

Extract the contents of the archive:
```bash
tar xvf core-co-22.05-assets.tar.gz
```

Mark the location of the extracted contents before changing directory:
```bash
export LOCOREPATH=$(pwd)
```

### Building CODE
You need to clone it, run autoconf/automake, configure and build using the GNU
make. **Before moving on, [fork the repo](https://github.com/CollaboraOnline/online/fork) if you haven't done that yet.**

Now clone the forked repo:
{{% common-build-commands section="clone-online" %}}

{{% common-build-commands section="build-online" %}}

{{% common-build-commands section="run-unit-tests" %}}

</section>

{{% common-build-commands section="running" %}}

---

<section id="build-code-general" class="build-code-content">

## Build CODE

### Dependencies

The CODE must be built on Linux, and you need the following:

* LibreOffice
  + you need to build your own tree
* Poco library: http://pocoproject.org/
  + either use a package from your distro, or build it yourself (see below)
* libpng, libcap-progs
  + use the packages from your distro

### LibreOffice

CODE needs LibreOffice to be built to run. However, you have two options to meet this requirement: either by building it locally (Option A - recommended), or by downloading a daily built archive (Option B - quick & dirty) which contains only the absolutely necessary pieces. If you are working only on the online side, without doing any code-level changes on the LibreOffice core, or you just want to quickly get going to do some small fixes, you may prefer the second way.

#### Option A - Build LibreOffice locally (Recommended)
To build LibreOffice, follow the LibreOffice building pages:

https://wiki.documentfoundation.org/Development/BuildingOnLinux

Make sure you use and build the following specific core branch: `distro/collabora/co-22.05`

#### Option B - Download a Daily-Built Archive of LibreOffice (Quick & Dirty)
Download the daily archive:
```
wget https://github.com/CollaboraOnline/online/releases/download/for-code-assets/core-co-22.05-assets.tar.gz
```

Extract the archive:
```
tar xvf core-co-22.05-assets.tar.gz
```

You should now have two new directories extracted: `instdir` and `include`. You will use the locations of these directories for the `configure` parameters in the following steps.

### POCO

If you use openSUSE Leap 15.3, you can use:

    zypper ar http://download.opensuse.org/repositories/devel:/libraries:/c_c++/openSUSE_Leap_15.3/devel:libraries:c_c++.repo
    zypper in poco-devel libcap-progs python3-polib libcap-devel npm libtool cppunit-devel pam-devel python3-lxml

Similar repos exist for other openSUSE and SLE releases.

Collabora provides Poco packages for Debian 8, Debian 9, Ubuntu 16.04 LTS,
and CentOS 7 via the CODE (Collabora Online Development Edition) repositories,
see:

https://www.collaboraoffice.com/code/linux-packages/

Alternatively you can build your own POCO. In that case, ideally use a recent version like
1.10.1 or newer.

### Building CODE

You need to clone it, run autoconf/automake, configure and build using the GNU
make:
{{% common-build-commands section="clone-online" %}}
```bash
./autogen.sh
```
```bash
./configure --enable-silent-rules --with-lokit-path=${MASTER}/include \
            --with-lo-path=${MASTER}/instdir \
            --with-poco-includes=<POCOINST>/include --with-poco-libs=<POCOINST>/lib \
            --enable-debug --enable-cypress
```
Note: you can also add `--disable-ssl` instead of changing coolwsd.xml everytime you want to disable ssl.
```bash
make -j `nproc`
```
In the above, `${MASTER}` is the location of the LibreOffice source tree you have built
in the previous steps. `POCOINST` is the location of your custom-built or externally installed POCO library.
If you use POCO from a distro package (not a self-built version), you can omit
the `--with-poco-includes` and `--with-poco-libs` from the above.

{{% common-build-commands section="run-unit-test" %}}
</section>

{{% common-build-commands section="running" %}}

{{< edit-button to="/content/post/build-code.md" name="Edit page">}}
